# Learn Assembly Course

From [Tutorials Point](https://www.tutorialspoint.com/assembly_programming/assembly_introduction.htm)

The _fetch-decode-execute_ cycle:
1. Fetch instruction from memory
2. Decode (identify) the instruction
3. Execute the instruction

## Basic Syntax
3 sections: data (constants), bss (variables), text (code). Declared with `section.data` etc. The text section will be like

```asm
section.text
  global _start
_start:
```

Comments are `;`

Statements can be: instructions, assembly directives, macros. Instruction format is `[label] mnemonic [operands]`. e.g `INC COUNT`

## Hello World

```asm
section .text
  global _start

_start:
  mov edx, len
  mov ecx, msg
  mov ebx, 1    ; file descriptor (stdout)
  mov eax, 4    ; sys call number (sys_write)
  int 0x80      ; interrupt to execute syscall

  mov eax,1
  int 0x80

section .data
msg db 'Hello, World', 0xa ; string with terminator
len equ $ - msg            ; length of string. no. of bytes from msg to here ($)
```

## Registers
x86 processor has _segment registers_: 16bit pointers to memory locations. The data segment (DS) contains data and bss sections, the code (CS) segment contains text section. There is also a stack segment (SS), and three general ones (ES, FS, GS).

10 32bit and 6 16bit in IA-32 architecture. General, control and segment registers. The General are subdivided into data, pointer and index registers. 4 General Data (A, B, C, D)[^1], can be used as 32bit (EAX), or you can use only parts of them, with AX (lower 16bits 0-15), AH (Hi byte 8-15) or AL (Lo byte 0-7). A and D are used as the input and output in most arithmetic operations. C is used in looping.

[^1]: For accumulator, base, counter, data, though this seems suspiciously convenient to me.

The instruction pointer, stack pointer and base pointer EIP, ESP, EBP. They are often used in conjunction with segment registers (SS:SP)

Index registers ESI (source index), EDI (destination index) are using in index addressing and sometimes in arithmetic.

The control registers are the instruction pointer and flags register. A flag is a bit in the register, that is often set or unset after operations. Examples: overflow, interrupt, sign, zero flags. Conditional instructions branch execution based on these flags. E.g. jump if zero `JZ` looks at the zero flag.

## Memory segmentation
We saw that the code segment of memory contains the program code.
