# Linux Window Manager Part 1: The X Protocol and X11 implementation
The X protocol and X11 are a _huge_ topic. 
The protocols are decades old and contain the kind of cruft you would expect from something that old. 
This post will be limited to some of the key elements and concepts of the protocol and some simple examples.

## Displays, Screens and Windows.
At the core of X is its hierarchy of Display, Screen and Window.

The display is at the base. It corresponds to a instance managed by Xorg, the display server.
To start interacting with Xorg, you first call `Display* display = XOpenDisplay(NULL)`.
This opens a _connection_ between the client and the server.
It returns a pointer to the display which you'll be interacting with[^1].
By calling functions and passing this display is how you will do most of your interactions with Xorg.

[^1]: Instead of null, you can call for a specific display by passing a string. When the argument is `NULL`, it returns the display on the `$DISPLAY` path. For me, the result of `echo $DISPLAY` is `:0`

A Display contains `Screens`.
Each screen corresponds to a physical monitor (I think).
For this series we're not going to consider scenarios where there are multiple screens, so I won't talk about it.
Suffice it to say that that calling `DefaultScreen(display)` returns an integer which points to the default Screen instance.

A screen has several important elements to it.
First, it has a _width_ and _height_.
Second it has a _root window_.
This is a window that takes up all of the available screen.
Any 'child windows' (like for applications) that the client will ask to put on the screen will be attached to, and nested under, this root.
The screen also has depths, visuals, colormaps, and graphical contexts, all of which we will talk about later.

A Window is really the core concept here.
The concrete representation of a window in X is quite obscure, so we'll consider a model implied by the API.
A key thing to understand is that windows _nest_.

```
XOrg <-> Display - Screen1 - Root-Window
                              /     \
                            W1      W2
                           /  \     / \
                          W11 W12  W21 W22
```

There are a few ways to create a window, but one is:

```c
window = XCreateSimpleWindow(display, parent_window, 
                             POSX, POSY, WIDTH, HEIGHT,BORDER, 
                             BlackPixel(display, screen),
                             WhitePixel(display, screen));
```

You can see we specify the display connection, the window under which our new window will nest (the "parent" window), positional attributes x,y,w,h,b (b = border width), and the border and background display attributes[^2].

[^2]: The window object is actually just an identifier - an aliased unsigned long. Xorg maintains a registry of windows keyed to identifiers, and when you're interacting with it, you're just passing the window identifier so Xorg knows which one you're taking about.

Finally, it's important to _map_ the window to the display with `XMapWindow(display, window)`, which makes it eligible for display.
Why this is necessary I don't know.

Here is a simple program which does all of these things[^3].

[^3]: This and many other code samples here are taken from [FTLabs X11 Tutorial series](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLyxjkYF62ii8ZgaRBPlj9nVIoOeIaszw-), sometimes with modifications.

```c
#include <X11/Xlib.h>
#include <err.h>
#include <stdio.h>

#define POSX 500
#define POSY 500
#define WIDTH 500
#define HEIGHT 500
#define BORDER 15

static Display* display;
static int screen;
static Window root_window;

int main() {
  if ((display = XOpenDisplay(NULL)) == NULL)
    errx(1, "Can't open display");

  screen = DefaultScreen(display);
  root_window = RootWindow(display, screen);

  Window window = XCreateSimpleWindow(display, root_window, 
                               POSX, POSY, WIDTH, HEIGHT,
                               BORDER, BlackPixel(display, screen),
                               WhitePixel(display, screen));

  XMapWindow(display, window);

  XEvent event;
  while (XNextEvent(display, &event) == 0);

  XUnmapWindow(display, window);
  XDestroyWindow(display, window);
  XCloseDisplay(display);

  return 0;
}
```
The thing in this example which hasn't been discussed yet is the `XEvent`, and the while loop.

## Loop and Events
Most graphical programs work in the same way: they set themselves up, and they put themselves into an infinite loop where they are waiting for user input.
When they receive that input, they _handle_ it (changing the state of the program and usually what is displayed) and wait for the next input.
It will remain in the loop until one of the inputs is the 'stop' input, whereupon it will exit the loop and reach the end of the program, exiting.

As we saw in part 1 of this series, a key responsibility of the display server is to handle commands between the keyboard and mouse and the client applications.
This is done by the _XEvent_ system.
When the kernel receives, for example, a keyboard input, it will pass it on to XOrg.
XOrg will raise an _event_, and pass it on to the relevant client over the established connections.
The client will be in a loop of `while (XNextEvent...)`, so will pick up the event, and handle it.

There are 34 events total that X recognizes.
Here are a few key ones to give you a flavor.

* KeyPress
* KeyRelease
* ButtonPress
* ButtonRelease
* MotionNotify
* FocusIn
* VisibilityNotify
* ResizeRequest

The client will typically handle these in a switch statement, like this:

```c
while (XNextEvent(display, &event) == 0) {
  switch (event.type) {
    case ButtonPressMask: return; // exit the loop on button press
  }
}
```

Note what `XNextEvent` is doing here: It takes the display and a pointer to the event, listens to the communication channel established with the Xorg server, and when an event is sent over the channel it returns 0, and sets the `event` local variable to the received event.

The program can then examine the event - here it checks the `type` of the event, but there are other attributes such as `window`, `time`, `x, y` coordinates - and decides what to do.

## Window Attributes and Masks
Windows are pretty complicated things, and have a lot of ways in which they can be specified.
Before we created a window using the 'simple' interface, which hides a lot of the details and the expense of flexibility.
To get the flexibility you have to set a lot of addition things.
X has the 'full' create API:

```c
Window XCreateWindow(
  Display *display, Window parent, 
  int x, int y, unsigned int width, unsigned int height, 
  unsigned int border_width, 
  int depth, unsigned int class, 
  Visual *visual, 
  unsigned long valuemask, 
  XSetWindowAttributes *attributes);
```

Going through this line-by-line:
* display and parent window, as well as the standard `xywhb` pattern are as we saw in the simple API
* Visual and depth we will talk about a bit later
* class is either 1 (InputOutput) or 2 (InputOnly), to determine if it only takes input from XOrg, or if it communicates back to it as well.

The `XSetWindowAttributes` structure is a way to help with setting up Windows.

```c
XSetWindowAttributes xwa;

xwa.background_pixel = WhitePixel(display, screen);
xwa.border_pixel = BlackPixel(display, screen);
xwa.event_mask = ButtonPressMask;
```

Background and Border Pixel are the same as we saw with the simple API, and we'll talk more about those when we talk about colors.
The other important thing here is the _Event Mask_.
This is one of two masks involved in creating a window, the other being the _Value Mask_ that is passed directly in the creation function.
The Event Mask simply corresponds to the events that you want your window to 'listen' for.
We specify a `ButtonPressMask` event, because we want our window to react to mouse button presses, but not a `KeyPressMask` because we don't want our window to react to keystrokes.
Event Mask is a _mask_ of bitflags, so they can be ORd together: `Button1MotionMask | ButtonPressMask | ButtonReleaseMask`

The value mask simply specifies to the create window constructor which attributes you've set in your xwa. For the above example, we've set the background and foreground pixel, and the event mask, so our value mask will be `CWBackPixel | CWBorderPixel | CWEventMask`.

## Properties and Atoms
## Graphics Contexts
## Visuals
## Hints
## PixelMaps
## Drawables
## Xft, CharSets, Fonts and Text
## Cursors
## Errors
## XSync

## Resources
* https://tronche.com/gui/x/xlib/window-information/properties-and-atoms.html
* https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLyxjkYF62ii8ZgaRBPlj9nVIoOeIaszw- 
