# Advent of Code 2024 day 1

AOC is here again, how festive. Day 1 is, as usual, a warm up. I did
it in C.

The problem when the narrative is stripped away is that, given two
1000 length sequences of numbers:

- Part 1: sum the (absolute) differences between the respective
  sequences at each position.
- Part 2: multiply each number in list 1 by the frequency of that
  number in list 2, and sum the result.

Both very easy, but 1 required that I write a quicksort
implementation, which I haven't done for a long time. And 2 took me a
couple of iterations to realize that since I already had sorted arrays
I didn't need hashmaps.

## Part 1: Quicksort

I basically pinched it from
[G4G](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/quick-sort-algorithm/).

But the idea is that you pick a number to act as the 'pivot', and then
you restructure the array so that the pivot number is in in the
'right' place - that is, everything lower than it is before it in the
array, and everything higher than it is after it in the array. Then
you recursively sort the lower elements and higher elements.

This restructure operation (called 'partition') is where the meat is.
The quicksort itself is just like:

```c
void quick_sort(int array[], int low, int high) {
  if (low < high) {
    int p = partition(array, low, high);
    quick_sort(array, low, p - 1);
    quick_sort(array, p + 1, high);
  }
}
```

The guard is there as a termination condition. If the subarray has
length 1 (low=high) or 0 (low = high+1) then the subarray is already
sorted.

The way you partition the array is like this:

1. keep track of the 'split', starting at the first element of the
   subarray. The split is going to represent the first element that is
   _higher_ than the pivot.
2. iterate through each element of the subarray, and if the element is
   less than the pivot, swap it with the split, and increment the
   split.
3. finally, swap the pivot with the split location, and return the
   split location.

As an example, take the sequence 3, 8, 7, 6, 4. We pick the last one
(4) as the pivot, and set the split position to 0 (where the 3 is
currently). The iterations will look like this:

- We start with `3si 8 7 3 6 4`
- 3 is less than the pivot, so we swap to get `3 8si 7 3 6 4`
- 8 is more than the pivot, so we get `3 8s 7i 3 6 4`
- 7 is more than the pivot, so we get `3 8s 7 3i 6 4`
- 3 is less than the pivot, so we get `3 3 7s 8 6i 4`
- 6 is more than the pivot, so we get `3 3 7s 8 6 4i`
- Finally we swap the final with the split to get `3 3 4s 8 6 7`, and
  return the index of the split.

Notice that everything below the split index is less than the value of
the number at the split index, and everything above the split index is
greater than it.

```c
int partition(int array[], int first, int last) {
  int pivot = array[last];
  int split = first;
  for (int i = first; i < last; i++)
    if (array[i] < pivot)
      swap(&array[i], &array[split++]);
  swap(&array[split], &array[last]);
  return split;
}
```

## Part 2: No dictionaries required



## The Code

https://github.com/RedPenguin101/aoc2024/blob/main/c/src/day1.c
