# Understanding and Emulating the PDP-11
## The PDP-11 and motivation
The PDP-11 was a series of 16-bit microcomputers from DEC produced during the 70's. It's probably most well known for being the first platform on which Unix was available. However it was an innovative product at the time, not only in the general sense of shifting the industry towards a minicomputer model, but also for it's instruction set and register layout.

Recently I've been learning a little about low-level programming for x86 processors, such as bootloader and kernel development. This requires a fair bit of understanding of how processors work which I frankly lack. At some point I came across the [PDP-11 Handbook](https://pdos.csail.mit.edu/6.828/2005/readings/pdp11-40.pdf) and thought it might be both interesting and a good learning experience to understand how it works by writing an emulator for it.

This is going to be a "write as you go" sort of deal, so it will likely jump around a bit. My general plan of attack is to start with the instruction set, emulating all the different instructions and addressing modes. After that I don't know exactly, but I guess maybe moving on to interrupts and things like that.

The only assumed knowledge here is the concept of binary numbers.

## The very basics of a processor
To start off, we need to know in very general terms how a processor works. This will be a very simplified explanation with some convenient lies in it, but should be helpful for the first part of the journey.

### Memory
Actually, even before we talk about processors, we should talk about memory, by which I mean "RAM". For our purposes, we'll consider memory to be a way to store ones and zeros ("binary numbers"), which can be read, and changed. So it's basically a giant list of binary numbers. Each binary number is called a "bit". For convenience, we consider memory to consist of blocks of 8 bits, called bytes. And we say that each byte has a sequentially numbered "address" denoting its location in memory. RAM is generally denoted by how many bytes it can hold. For example, "4Kb of RAM", means the RAM has 4x1024 or 4096 bytes.

```
Address     byte value
----------------------
...         ...
100         01101101
101         11010011
102         00000000
...         ...
```

An important concept to understand is that while these numbers are in one sense just numbers, they can be interpreted to mean many other things. In fact _any_ other thing. The only requirement is that a _convention_ is established and stuck to. One convention that has evolved is called ASCII, and is the interpretation of bytes as _characters_: letters and numbers that can be printed to a screen[^1]. For example, the number `01000001` is interpreted as the character `A`, `01110111` is `w`, `00110101` is `5`, and so on for any letter or number, and for many other common characters.

[^1]: Actually there are many, many conventions for doing this.

### Instructions
A processor is a machine that can take these binary numbers and uses a convention (specific to that processor) to interpret those numbers as **instructions** which tell it to do certain things involving moving or changing bits in memory. For example the number `101010000011` could be interpreted as "Take the number in location 3, and add one to it.". Each processor has different instructions it can perform.

This allows us to define a _program_, which is a series of these instructions (or "codes") in memory, that the processor executes one-by-one. So that's all a program is: a sequence of binary numbers that are loaded into memory, that a processor then "executes" by interpreting them as instructions.

Writing programs in binary quickly proves very tedious, and reading them even more so. So programs are generally denoted in a more human readable _assembly language_, which provides shorthand terms for all instructions. The example we looked at before, `101010000011` would be written as `INC R3`. This allows _people_ to write programs as a list of these shorthand terms. Another program called an _assembler_ will translate these back into the binary number equivalents which the processor can understand.

### Registers
We've seen that the way a processor works is that it looks in a location / address in RAM, sees what instruction is stored there and executes that instruction, and then moves on to the next location. But how does it know which address in RAM to look?

To find the address to look at, it references the _instruction pointer_ or _program counter_ (PC), which is a tiny piece of memory _on the CPU itself_, which can store a number. That number is the address in RAM which the processor will look. Then when the instruction is complete, the PC will increment so it now store the address of the _next_ memory location.

One benefit of having a tiny bit of memory on the CPU itself is that the CPU can read and write to it _much_ faster. By comparison, the RAM is several centimeters away, which is a long way when you're talking about tiny fractions of a second. This attribute is very useful, so a typical processor has several of these tiny memory locations, which are called _registers_. Some registers have specific purposes, such as the instruction pointer for pointing to the next instruction to execute. Some are _general purpose_ registers, which the programmer can read or write to at their convenience.

Most instructions are stated in terms of registers. The assembly example we saw before, `INC R3`, actually means "take the number in _general register 3_, and increase it by 1." Another, `ADD R0, R4` means "take the number in register 0, and add it to the value in register 4."

## The PDP-11 Processor and instruction set
### Words 
A concept we need to get used to when working with the PDP-11 is the "word". It's actually very simple: a word is a 16-bit number, whereas a byte is an 8-bit number. Words crop up all over the place with the PDP-11, which is why it's described as a "16-bit computer". The most obvious place words show up are in the registers, which are all 16-bit. All instructions are 16-bit numbers.

Where this can get a little complicated is in working with memory. Memory is still primarily thought of as bytes (8-bits), and the concept of words (which are 16-bits and therefore two bytes) is sort of layered on top of that. We'll get into more examples as we get into the details, but for now, consider that there are two ways to think of memory: as bytes with sequential addresses, as we described above:

```
Address     value
---------------------
...         ...
100         0000 0001
101         0000 0010
102         0000 0011
103         0000 0100
...         ...
```

The second is as _word layout_, where memory consists of 16-bit words, each with an _even_ address (100, 102 etc.), and each consisting of a low byte and a high byte.

```
hi-byte   | lo-byte   | Address
----------|-----------|--------
...       | ...       | ...
0000 0010 | 0000 0001 | 100
0000 0100 | 0000 0011 | 102
...       | ...       | 104
```

The critical thing to realize is that this is the _same exact thing_, just interpreted differently. A particular thing to notice here is that all words are located at an _even address_ (the odd address points to the hi-byte).

It's here we're going to write our first emulation code to help us work with this memory model. We set up a simple emulated RAM with 4096 16bit words, and write a `write_word` and `read_word` function. This takes care of the division into hi and lo bytes for us. It also checks we're not trying to access a 'word' starting at an odd address, which is illegal.

```c
#define WORDS 4096

uint8_t ram[2 * WORDS];

void clear_ram() {
  for (int i = 0; i < 2 * WORDS; i++)
    ram[i] = 0;
}

uint16_t read_word(uint16_t address) {
  assert(address % 2 == 0);
  uint8_t lo_byte = ram[address];
  uint8_t hi_byte = ram[address + 1];

  return (uint16_t)hi_byte << 8 | (uint16_t)lo_byte;
}

void write_word(uint16_t address, uint16_t word) {
  assert(address % 2 == 0);
  uint8_t hi_byte = word >> 8;
  uint8_t lo_byte = (0xFF & word);
  ram[address] = lo_byte;
  ram[address + 1] = hi_byte;
}

void tests() {
  printf("Testing read/write words\n");
  // write to address 14 - note, assert will fail if address is odd
  write_word(0xE, 0xAABB);
  assert(ram[14] == 0xBB);
  assert(ram[15] == 0xAA);
  assert(read_word(0xE) == 0xAABB);
  printf(":: OK\n");
}

void main() {
  tests();
}
```

### Registers
The PDP-11 has 9, 16-bit registers. The first 6 are general purpose registers, called `R0`, `R1`, up to `R5`. There is also the Program Counter (PC), which we described above. Finally there is the Stack Pointer (SP) and Processor Status Word (PSW), which we will ignore for a while until those concepts come up more naturally.

We add the registers to our emulator:

```c
#define SP 6
#define PC 7
#define PSW 8
uint16_t registers[9] = {0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0};

void clear_registers() {
  for (int i = 0; i < 9; i++)
    registers[i] = 0;
}
```

## Octal numbers
One of the most challenging aspects I found when doing this was working in the _octal number_ format. Everyone is familiar with decimal (base 10), and most programmers will have some exposure to hexadecimal (base 16) and binary (base 2). But octal (base 8) is something that seems to have gone out of favour over the last decades. However, almost _everything_ to do with the PDP-11 is done in octal, so it would be a good idea to understand the concepts.

The reason hex is used so frequently in low level programming is that 16 is the 4th power of 2. That means that a hex number (from `0` to `F`) is exactly equivalent to 4 bits. It further means that _two_ hex characters (from `00` to `FF`) represents 8 bits, or one byte. This is _extremely_ useful, because it means you can easily represent the most common groupings of binary numbers used in computing: a byte (2 hex characters), 16bits (4 characters), 32bits (8) and 64 (16).

Octal is base 8, which is the 3rd power of 2. This means it also has the benefit of being able to cleanly represent a number of bits, but here it is _three_ bits, not four.

```
Octal    Binary
---------------
0        000
1        001
2        010
3        011
4        100
5        101
6        110
7        111
```

Two octal characters represent 6 bits, three are 9 bits, four are 12 bits, 5 are 15 bits. Unlike hex, there is no way of cleanly representing 8 or 16 bits, i.e. bytes and words, directly. This is what caused much of my difficulty when doing this work[^2].

[^2]: I can see from the handbook that there is an _18 bit_ addressing mode, which I haven't looked at yet, but seems buck-wild to me.

To illustrate the point, consider that a byte can described in octal as 3 characters, between 000 and 377 (`1111 1111` in binary). A work (16 bit) can be represented as a number of 6 characters, between 0 and 177777. Compare this to hex, where a byte is `00-FF`, and a word is `0000-FFFF`. Notice that the hex word (take `56AE`) can be split into the 'high byte' `56` and 'low byte' `AE` trivially. The octal equivalent of this word is `53256`. When divided into a high an low bytes, this is `126` and `256`. It's much less obvious how these two compose together into the word.

From this point on, all numbers are in octal unless otherwise specified (unless it's obviously in binary).

## Anatomy of a PDP-11 instuction
A PDP-11 instruction is a 16bit word. We've seen that this is a bit awkward to express in octal, since it's 5 octal characters (5x3=15 bits) plus an extra bit. This is how we're going to think of a PDP-11 instruction.

```
In Binary: 00X XXX|XXX|XXX XXX XXX
In Octal:    a  B1  B2  B3   C   D
```
Here, each uppercase character stands for a single octal digit, or 3 bits. The lowercase a is the 'extra' bit at the start. The extra bit has a significance we will look at shortly. B1, B2, B3 are each an octal character, but B will refer to a three octal character for reasons that will become apparent.

Instructions consist of an _operation code_ (opcode), and one or two _operands_. An operand consists of a _mode_ and a _register number_ (RN). An opcode is stated as an up to 4-character octal. For example, the number `50` is the "clear" or `CLR` operation. `6` is `ADD`, `51` is "increment" or `INC`. `1050` is the "clear byte" or `CLRB` operation.

All instructions are either _single operand_ or _double operand_. For single operands the above octal characters have the following interpretation:

* `aB` is the opcode
* `C` is the mode
* `D` is the RN

Whereas for double operand, the interpretation is

* `aB1` is the opcode
* `B2` is mode 1
* `B3` is RN 1
* `C` is mode 2
* `D` is RN 2

The easiest way to grasp this is to look at some examples:

```
SINGLE OPERAND
OP   | aB   CD | a B1  B2 B3  C   D
-----|---------|---------------------
CLR  | 0050 11 | 0 000 101000 001 001
CLR  | 0050 25 | 0 000 101000 010 101
COM  | 0051 11 | 0 000 101001 001 001
INC  | 0052 11 | 0 000 101010 001 001
COMB | 1051 04 | 1 000 101001 000 100
```
```
DOUBLE OPERAND
OP  | aB BB CD | a B1  B2  B3  C   D
----|----------|-----------------------
MOV | 01 11 22 | 0 001 001 001 010 010
CMP | 02 11 22 | 0 010 001 001 010 010
ADD | 06 11 22 | 0 110 001 001 010 010
SUB | 16 11 22 | 1 110 001 001 010 010
```

One important question that spring to mind is: "how do I tell if the instruction is single or double operand?" From the above tables, the answer should be evident: If B1 is 0, then it's a single operand instruction. Otherwise it's a double operand.

Before going further, let's write some functions to help us to extract the different parts of the instruction.

```c
uint8_t octal_group(uint16_t number, uint8_t group) {
  // returns a group of 3 bits (an Octal value) from a 16bit word
  // the first group is bits 0-2, the second is 3-5 etc.
  return 07 & (number >> 3 * group);
}

bool is_single_operand(uint16_t instruction) {
  return octal_group(instruction, 4) == 0;
}

uint16_t get_opcode(uint16_t instruction) {
  if (is_single_operand(instruction))
    return instruction >> 6;
  else
    return instruction >> 12;
}

void tests() {
  // snip
  printf("Testing single/double operand determination\n");
  assert(is_single_operand(005011));
  assert(is_single_operand(005111));
  assert(is_single_operand(0105104));
  assert(!is_single_operand(011122));
  assert(!is_single_operand(021122));
  assert(!is_single_operand(061122));
  assert(!is_single_operand(0161122));
  printf(":: OK\n");

  printf("Testing getting of opcodes\n");
  assert(get_opcode(005011) == 050);
  assert(get_opcode(005111) == 051);
  assert(get_opcode(0105104) == 01051);
  assert(get_opcode(011122) == 01);
  assert(get_opcode(021122) == 02);
  assert(get_opcode(061122) == 06);
  assert(get_opcode(0161122) == 016);
  printf(":: OK\n");
}
```


## Executing basic instructions
Let's start implementing some instructions. We'll follow the examples from sections 3-4 in the handbook linked earlier.

First, we'll implement the `INC R3` instruction, which increments the value in register 3 by 1. The opcode for `INC` is 52. So our instruction in octal is `005203`. That is, the opcode is `52`, the mode is `0` and the RN is `3`

```c
#define INC 052

void inc(uint16_t instruction) {
  uint8_t rn = octal_group(instruction, 0);
  registers[rn] += 1;
}

void execute_instruction() {
  uint16_t instruction = read_word(registers[PC]);
  uint16_t opcode = get_opcode(instruction);
  if (opcode == INC)
    inc(instruction);
  registers[PC] += 2;
}

void tests() {
  // snip
  printf("Testing basic instruction INC R3\n");
  clear_ram();
  clear_registers();
  // writing to ram address 0, which is where our program counter
  // is after clearing the registers
  write_word(0, 005223); 
  execute_instruction();
  assert(registers[PC] == 2); // the program counter should have increased to point at 
                              // the next word...
  assert(registers[3] == 1);  // And the value in R3 should now be 1
  printf(":: OK\n");
}
```

Next, let's try a double operand instruction: `ADD R2,R4`. The opcode for add is 06, so this instruction is `060204`: Modes 1 and 2 are both 0, RN1 is 2, and RN2 is 4. This operation will add the value of R2 into R4. So if R2 contains the value 2, and R4 contains the value 4, after the opration R4 will contain the value 6.

```c
#define ADD 06

void add(uint16_t instruction) {
  uint8_t rn2 = octal_group(instruction, 0);
  uint8_t rn1 = octal_group(instruction, 2);
  registers[rn2] += registers[rn1];
}

void execute_instruction() {
  uint16_t instruction = read_word(registers[PC]);
  uint16_t opcode = get_opcode(instruction);
  if (opcode == INC)
    inc(instruction);
  else if (opcode == ADD)
    add(instruction);
  registers[PC] += 2;
}

void tests() {
  printf("Testing instruction ADD R2,R4\n");
  clear_ram();
  clear_registers();
  registers[2] = 2;
  registers[4] = 4;
  write_word(0, 060204);
  execute_instruction();
  assert(registers[2] == 2);
  assert(registers[4] == 6);
  printf(":: OK\n");
}
```

Finally, we'll try `COMB R4`. This is "Byte mode complement", where complement is the one's complement operation, or 'flipping the bits. In C it's the `~` operator.

### Word mode and byte mode
We've seen that the PDP-11 mostly operates on words, and instructions generally operate on words too. For example when you use the operation `INC`, you are incrementing a _word_. However many operations also let you operate on individual _bytes_. These operations are generally like their word-flavour equivalents, but with a `B` appended. So `INCB` is "increment byte".

The 'extra bit' `a` that we've been using above is the 'flag' for whether the operation is in word mode or byte mode. So if `0051` is the opcode for `INC`, then `1051` is for `INCB`. Note that this is _not_ universal. For example, the opcode for `ADD` is 06 (a=0), and for subtract, it's 16 (a=1), but byte mode is not applicable here.

So what `COMB R4` will do is flip the _lo byte_ of the word in register 4. In the below I've added a couple more helpers for working with words.

```c
#define COMB 01051

// Word helpers

uint8_t hi_byte(uint16_t word) {
  return word >> 8;
}

uint8_t lo_byte(uint16_t word) {
  return 0xFF & word;
}

uint16_t make_word(uint8_t lo_byte, uint8_t hi_byte) {
  return (uint16_t)hi_byte << 8 | (uint16_t)lo_byte;
}

void comb(uint16_t instruction) {
  uint8_t rn = octal_group(instruction, 0);
  uint16_t reg_val = registers[rn];
  registers[rn] = make_word(~lo_byte(reg_val), hi_byte(reg_val));
}

// Note: I also added the opcode==COMB to the if-else statement in execute instruction, but it would be tedious to keep putting that, so from now on it's assumed

// tests
void tests() {
  // snip
  printf("Testing byte operations on words");
  assert(hi_byte(0xAABB) == 0xAA);
  assert(lo_byte(0xAABB) == 0xBB);
  assert(make_word(0xAA, 0xBB) == 0xBBAA); // careful!
  printf(":: OK\n");

  printf("Testing instruction COMB R4\n");
  clear_ram();
  clear_registers();
  registers[4] = 022222;
  write_word(0, 0105104);
  execute_instruction();
  assert(registers[4] == 022155);
  printf(":: OK\n");
}
```

## Addressing Modes
Before we continue implementing we need to talk about a crucial concept in how processors word: Addressing modes.

Up to this point we utilized the "opcode" and "register number" parts of the instruction, but ignored the "mode" (more accurately, the "addressing mode") part, which in the examples up to this point have always been zero. The mode zero actually indicates "register" mode, which translates as "operate on the value directly int the register." Hence, `ADD R2,R4` is interpreted as "add the value in register 2 to the value in register 4". However there are several other modes of addressing available. The modes are broken into two groups: direct addressing mode, and deferred or indirect addressing modes. We'll look first at the direct addressing modes:

```
MODE  NAME            SYNTAX      FUNCTION
0     Register        Rn          Register contains operand
2     Auto-increment  (Rn)+       Register used as pointer, then incremented
4     Auto-decrement  -(RN)       Register decremented, then used as a pointer
6     Index           X(Rn)       X is added to Rn to produce pointer
```

The simplest way to explain these is with examples, so let's get to it.

### Auto-increment mode
We will implement the instruction `CLR (R5)+`, which has octal code `005025` (note mode=2, register=5 in the last 2 digits.)

This instruction will do the following:
1. Look up the value in register 5 (say `030000`)
2. Find the address of that value in memory (`030000`)
3. Clear that address to zero.

We will also implement autodec here, since it works very similarly.

```c
// To stay true to the examples in the handbook, we need to increase the amount
// of RAM of our simulated machine
#define WORDS 32768 

// OPCODES
#define CLR 050
#define INC 052
#define ADD 06
#define COMB 01051

// MODES
#define REGISTER 00
#define AUTO_INC 02
#define AUTO_DEC 04
#define INDEX 06

void clr(uint16_t instruction) {
  uint8_t rn = octal_group(instruction, 0);
  uint8_t mode = octal_group(instruction, 1);

  if (mode == AUTO_DEC)
    registers[rn] -= 2; // Note that decrementing happens BEFORE the operation

  write_word(registers[rn], 0);

  if (mode == AUTO_INC)
    registers[rn] += 2;
}

tests() {
  printf("Testing instruction CLR (R5)+\n");
  clear_ram();
  clear_registers();
  registers[PC] = 020000;
  registers[5] = 030000;
  write_word(020000, 005025);
  write_word(030000, 0111116);
  execute_instruction();
  assert(registers[5] == 030002);
  assert(read_word(030000) == 0);
  printf(":: OK\n");
}
```
