% Thoughts on a budgeting program

# Personal financial tracking

What are my goals for personal finances.

* **I want to minimize cash-on-hand, so that net-worth isn't eroded by inflation**
* **I want to save $x every month, and invest it, so I can do dollar cost averaging**
* I want to be able to track the returns on my investments
* I want to be able to make sure my investments are balanced
* I want to be able to forecast net worth
* I want to see increases in my net worth month-on-month
* I want to encourage 'good spending'
* **I want to minimize how much I spend on some things, like groceries**
* I want to have an emergency float of cash so I won't have to liquidate assets
* I want to be able to plan for large upcoming expenses so I have enough cash on hand to meet them when I need, but without diminishing the amount I can save every month.
* I want creating a budget for the month to be very quick, sub 5 minutes
* I want uploading and assigning categories to payments to be basically automatic. 
* Preferably I don't want to have to be messing around with CSVs

# Personal Finance Program Function

## MVP

* Create a budget for the month
    * Calculate 'available amount for budget' from income and overspends of previous months categories.
    * Set plan-ahead targets: I want $x of cash available on y-date.
    * Set monthly allocations for Clearouts. I want to spend $x on this category this month
    * Set a float: I want to have $x available at all times.
* Ingest and categorize payments
* Record changes in value of investments
* I want to be able to see the increase in my net-worth on a month-by-month basis

## Budget flow

1. Close out previous month
2. Show:
    * Increase in net worth
    * Overspent categories
    * Underspent clearout categories
    * Liquidity
3. Display current plan-aheads (with "$x per month for next y months"), allows to select 'start saving' and opportunity to create new ones
4. Create budget: Allocates to clearouts, plan-aheads. Puts remainder to investment.

## Reconciliation flow

1. upload transactions (mappings).
2. check categories on transactions. If you change a mapping it will prompt you to update the mapping table.
3. add memos to transactions if needed.
4. Prompt to add investment valuation
5. Reconcile step: Is the balance on this x? If no, Want to book a reconciling entry against your float?

# Budget categories

**Clearouts**: The goals is to have these be zero at the end of each month. There are different types of these:

* Fixed: I pay rent of x every month, I need to budget x
* Spending target: Some things you _want_ to spend a certain amount on each month. Books, education etc. You want to make sure you're doing it. Same with savings targets (which get cleared out to savings accounts)
* Spending cap: Some things you want to minimize spending on. I don't want to spend more than X ordering takeout, etc.

**Plan-aheads**: You've identified something you want to buy. Maybe some furniture. You need to allow for it in the budget, maybe over multiple months. But building up floats of dead cash is bad, so you want to do it in one month if you can.

Say I've just renewed my newspaper subscription for $1000, and I know I'll have to renew again in 2 year. I'll set up a plan-ahead for two years time, and every month during my budget process it'll tell me 'you'll need to save $150 per month to meet this' or whatever. Then when it gets larger than I think I can comfortably handle in a single month, I'll start allocating to it. So here, maybe I'll allocate $250pm in the 4 months before I need to renew.

**Floats**: A goal of budgeting is to not have idle cash sitting around. But you want to have a float sitting around for emergencies. This should be a set-and-forget.

# Design

## Domain language:

* Transaction
* Record (Transaction)
* Budget-line
* Line-type: Plan-ahead, Clear-out, Float, Invest
* Account (cash, investment)
* Budget
* Month
* Allocate (Amount, to Category, for Month, in Budget)
* Budget Month (allocations)
* Plan-ahead: amount, date
* create plan-ahead
* set clear-out amount
* set float
* Category balance: aggregate of allocations and transactions
* Liquidity: aggregate of all category balances, or cash accounts.
* Net-worth: Liquidity + investments, or balance of all accounts

## API

```
Close Month (month)
Get Month Summary (month) -> month-summary
Get Plan-aheads -> plan-aheads
Create Plan-ahead (date, amount)
Set Budget (month, allocations)
Record Transactions (categorized transactions)
Get Budget Lines -> budget-lines
Get Category Balance at (month) -> category-balances
Make Budget (amount to allocate, category-balances) -> allocations
```

## Data

```
plan-ahead-goal: date, amount, current-monthly, finished?
budget-line: name, type, (plan-ahead-goal|float-amount|clear-amount)
allocation: month, budget-line, amount
transaction: account, date, amount, payee, memo, budget-line

month: allocations, transactions, closed?
```

## bleh

```
close(month) -> closed-month
carry-foward-balances(closed-month) -> carry-forwards
budget-lines(closed-month) -> budget-lines
allocate(budget-lines, amount-to-allocate) -> allocations
make-budget(allocations) -> month
add-transactions(transactions, month) -> month
```

## Budget flow

1. Close out previous month
2. Show:
    * Increase in net worth
    * Overspent categories
    * Liquidity
3. Display current plan-aheads (with "$x per month for next y months"), allows to select 'start saving' and opportunity to create new ones
4. Create budget: Allocates to clearouts, plan-aheads. Puts remainder to investment.

## Reconciliation flow

1. upload transactions (mappings).
2. check categories on transactions. If you change a mapping it will prompt you to update the mapping table.
3. add memos to transactions if needed.
4. Prompt to add investment valuation
5. Reconcile step: Is the balance on this x? If no, Want to book a reconciling entry against your float?

# Budget categories
