# Chess: White vs. Computer (1100) 8th May 2022: Win, 0 blunders, 0 mistakes
A good game. No blunders, no mistakes. No really tough moves either though, just took advantage of opponent mistakes.

* Moves 34
* Best  20 (58%)
* Exce   9 (26%)
* Good   2  (6%)
* Innac  1  (3%)
* Book   2

## Analysis
### Opening: Rui Lopez until move 3
1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 is standard RL. 3.. Bd6 is odd. 3.. a6 (the Morphy Defense) 4. Ba4 Nf6 is standard, because it attacks the bishop.

### Missed mates
After 30.h3, Rb3+ misses a mate in 2. My idea was to open the d pawn to attack by the Queen, but this misses the point that the pawn can be used _against_ the king. 30..Qc1+ means 31.Kd3 is forced, with any of Qd2#, Qc3#, or 31..Rc3# delivering the win.

After 31.Kf2 there is a faster mate than 31..Qxd4+. Actually quite a cool one. 31..Ne4+ means that either 32.fxe4 Rc2#, 32.Ke2 Rc2#, or 32.Kg2 Rb2#

### Missed best
* 3..Bd6 : a6 - see opening
* 10..c5 : a6 - allows taking toward the center and opening the A rank to the rook
* 11..cxb5 : Bc7 - don't really get this one. The bishop is undefended where it is I guess.
* 12..Bf4+ : Bc5 - Missed this. The queen can't retake because of the fork threat on Nxe4+. If white doesn't fall for the trap, the bishop is still better positioned.
* 13..Bxc1 : Re8 - I'm trading down here. Re8 prepares for Rxe4+, forking the King and Queen. But white can definitely avoid losing anything here. Too complicated for me.
* 16..Qc7 : Qa5 - both attack the e5 pawn, which is the goal. Difference seems v. subtle
* 18..Qb6 : Rd5 - My idea was to exchange queens. The rook move pushes the queen away. Too clever for me
* 29..a1=Q : g5 - Very clever: blocks off f4. Gets a mate on 32.

## Move list
```
1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Bd6[1] 4. a3 Nf6 5. Qe2 O-O 
6. Nc3 Nd4?[2] 7. Nxd4 exd4 8. Qc4?[3] dxc3 9. a4 cxd2+ 10. Kxd2 c6[4] 
11. c3 cxb5 12. Qd4 Bf4+ 13. Ke2 Bxc1 14. Raxc1 bxa4 15. Rcg1 Re8 
16. e5 Qc7 17. f3 Rxe5+ 18. Kf2 Qb6 19. b4 axb3 20. Rc1 Qxd4+
21. cxd4 Rb5 22. g3 a5 23. Ra1 a4 24. Rac1 b2 25. Rxc8+ Rxc8 
26. Rb1 a3 27. g4 a2 28. Rxb2 Rxb2+ 29. Ke3 a1=Q 30. h3 Rb3+[5]
31. Kf2 Qxd4+[5] 32. Kg3 Qe5+ 33. Kf2 Rc2+ 34. Kf1 Rb1# 0-1

[1]: See opening analysis
[2]: a mistake, opening the line that transpires
[3]: A bad mistake, allowing the knight take
[4]: fine, a6 is a bit better
[5]: Missed mates, see above
```
