% Sources of power

# Purpose of power
Why attempt to gain power? Sometimes there is no explicit purpose. All people to some degree seek it, as an evolutionary imperative. Some, rare, people seem to have a pathological instinct for it: when they spot an opportunity to gain it, they cannot help but jump for it, like a dog chasing a car. Some, a society's aristocracy, are born and bred to it: from an early age they are handed both the means to get it and the assumption that they should have it, and as a result they are more likely to get it.

Where there is purpose, it can vary widely. In the most dire of circumstances it is simply a necessity of survival. A desire for money, respect, ego are all drivers.

This essay is not about those purposes, nor about power for its own sake. The focus here is on the obtaining of power as a means to an end of obtaining some goal, a means to influence the world around you to into a shape that you desire.

The distinction might seem academic, but in fact it places a key constraint on the methods we can consider: The methods of gaining and exercising power must be compatible at all times with effective organization. The power-base you build using these techniques _must be able to get things done_. This is very important, because many methods, perhaps the simplest ones, do the opposite: they provide individual power at the expense of the ability of an organization to function effectively. Since the goal is to use the power you gain to achieve your ends, gaining power at the cost of breaking your organization is counterproductive.

Happily, while this constraint does limit our methods, the effective organization that you build _can_ be leveraged in the accumulation of further power, the results you obtain as arguments for more authority, and can thus form a virtuous circle. Though this does not happen automatically.

# Decomposition of power
Power is the ability to get other people to do what you want them to do, and the ability to resist having the will of others imposed on you. Power is power over _people_. These people can be broken into groups.

* Yourself: Self-control is foundational
* Superiors: Those who have authority over you, and whose authority you rely on
* Subordinates: Those whom you have authority over
* Peers: Everyone else

Different types of power

* **Leverage:** Using the hope or threat of something that the other person wants or doesn't want.
* **Manipulation:** Convincing someone that they want what you want. This can include deceit, charisma, persuasion, information control, overpowering
* **Alliance:** forming explicit or implicit cliques to pool power.

Amassing power requires combination of all three of these. Accumulating levers of power, manipulating all around you, forming and breaking of alliances. In reality, the boundaries between the three are not so clear cut, and the nuance lies in the interactions between them.

# People of power
Power is never individual. In isolation, it doesn't even exist. It can only ever be considered in the context of an organization, be it political, private or informal. It is a network of relationships and interactions.

## Formal and informal power networks
In an organization, there is a formal power structure, embodied in the organizational chart. This is usually a simple tree, with simple 'reporting lines' between them. There is also the informal power structure, which is written down nowhere. The relationship between these two structures is the first thing we must examine.

In any organization, power broadly cascades from the top: a CEO or a President. This position has the ultimate formal authority, embodied in the written rules of the organization and resulting in them being at the top of the org chart. However achieving these positions in the first place requires the sponsorship of a substantial informal power-base. The installation of a new CEO is, in effect, also the installation of their power base. One of the first moves of a new boss will be to modify the formal organization structure to more closely align to their informal power network.

Many will denigrate the formal power structure, the formal authority, of an organization: the "real" power, they say, lies in the informal. This is true to an extent, but is misses an important truth: While it is true that one should never assume that a power network is a one-to-one match with the formal organization chart, the formal chart _does_ form the basis of informal network. Don't mistake the direction of causality: as mentioned, the formal network tends to align to the informal one, rather than the other way around.

It is more productive to think of the org chart as the rough sketch, a simplification, of the true, informal power network, a simple tree connecting people by simple lines. But when you zoom in and look at the detail, complexities emerge: the lines are not the same width, some are weak, and some are very strong. And there are _many, many more_ lines than on the formal organization chart: the lines go between any people who interact with each other in any way. Thus the formal power network is _useful_ in that it provides a high-level understanding, and the lines on it will tend to be the most important ones. But it should never be considered as anything other than a massive simplification.

Bearing this in mind, there are three key types of relationship that are important for you to consider.

The first is that with the people whose power, directly and indirectly, you rely on: your **superiors**. Roughly speaking, these will be the people who trace a direct line on the formal organization chart between you and the top, though there can certainly be circumstances where this is not the case.

The second is with those people who rely on you, your **subordinates**. Again speaking roughly, these are those who report up to you on the org chart, and who report up to them, to the bottom of the chart.

The third is those people who you interact with, but who you don't have formal authority over, nor do they have formal authority over you. These we will call your **peers**. The power dynamics here can be the most subtle of all, especially in organizations where the flow of work is less formalized. Consequently it offers the greatest opportunity to gain the levers of power.

Effective power resides in building a power-base: an organization within your organization that you can influence to achieve your goals. This involves using the power dynamics of the organization effectively: gaining loyalty of your subordinates, gaining more power from your superiors (without becoming a threat to their own power), and gaining leverage over your peers.

We will examine each of these relationships in turn, but before we look at these we need to address a forth relationship: your relationship with yourself.

## Self-control

## Superiors
Because achieving these positions usually requires a great skill at the game of power, people in these positions will likely have very great informal authority as well. Organizations are always set up in such a way that there is a _reliance_ involved: you, to at least some degree, rely on those more powerful than you, and in return they gain some degree of the power of those they rely on.

For example, a minister in a kingdom has a great deal of power, because they have the power of patronage over their department, and decision making over a whole nation in some area. But that power comes at the cost of a reliance on the king, who can remove it at any time. A deputy minister will have the same dynamic with the minister that the minister does with the king.

## Subordinates

## Peers

# Methods of power
## Leverage
Leverage is using something the other person wants, or the threat of something they don't want, to obtain something that you want. This can take the form of straight-forward bargaining. But in more subtle form, it is the _hope_ (or fear) of future consequences that provides the power, not the fulfillment of those consequences.

The key characteristic of those who are best at accruing power is the ability to find these levers where they seemingly did not exist before.

* Patronage or money: Hope that you will gift it to them, or fear you will take it away. _Never_ gratitude that you gave or didn't take away.
* Controlling access to others, the gatekeeper. You can't talk to this person unless I broker it.
* Popular following
* Following of force (Caesar, OGPU)

## Manipulation
Manipulation is persuading the other person that what you want is actually what _they_ want as well, or what you want will be good for them.

* Charisma: The magic spell. But different types
* Rhetoric
* The bulwark against external threat, real or imagined.

# Influence over higher authority

# Other stuff that is relevant but I don't know what to do with yet

* The (fragile) clique of common interest (Trimuvirate, troika)
* Loyalty of subordinates. But how?
* Proximity to power. The ear of the King, the Groom of the Stool 
* Gravitas
* Effective use of organization inertia, knowing when to use it, knowing when to break it.
* The dark arts: Destroying effectiveness to consolidate power. The goal is the opposite: Accrue power by being effective.
