% A Physics Puzzle

A fun physics puzzle from [twitter](https://twitter.com/gravity_levity/status/1499576199873450007)

> A car is moving at 60mph, when the driver notices an obstacle ahead. Hitting the brakes, the driver decelerates at a constant rate, and manages to come to a stop just barely before hitting the obstacle. If the car had instead been moving at 70mph, and started decelerating at the same place and at the same rate, with what speed would it have hit the obstacle.

The author says "Even if you know how to solve it, try to make a guess about what answer feels right. The answer is fairly surprising!". I would've guessed 10mph, right up until that final sentence, which means it's probably much higher. I would guess 35mph

I believe this is a problem of "equations of motion under constant acceleration". But I don't remember what the formula are for this. 

I remember that acceleration is the derivative of velocity, and velocity is the derivative of distance, so if acceleration is a constant $A$ and starting velocity is $V$, then $v=V-At$, and $d=Vt-0.5At^2$

```clojure
(defn v [V A t] (+ V (* A t)))
(defn d [V A t] (+ (* V t) (* 0.5 A t t)))
```

The question mentions acceleration is constant, but doesn't specify what it is, which means it doesn't matter, so we can just chuck in any value and it should work fine.

Let's play around with some numbers. If $V=60$ and $A=2$, how much time does it take to reach 0? 

$$
V-At=0, 60=2t, t=30
$$

So the barrier is at $d=(60 \cdot 30) - (0.5 \cdot 2 \cdot 30^2)=900$.

Now, if $V=70$, what is $v$ when $d=900$ ($A$ is still -2)?. 

$900 = 70t-t^2$, which means $t=16.97$ by quadratic formula. So $v=70 \times -2 \times 16.98 = 36.06$, about 36mph.

Generalizing to a full algebraic solution:

From the starting point

$$
v = V - At \\ 
\text{} \\
d = Vt - 0.5At^2
$$

Let $V_1, V_2$ be the first and second starting speeds respectively
$$
\text{when } v=0, t=\frac{V_1}{A} \\
\text{} \\
D=V_1 t - 0.5At^2  \\
\text{} \\
\text{ where D is the distance to the obstacle}\\
\text{} \\
D = V_1 \frac{V_1}{A} - \frac{A}{2} \frac{V_1^2}{A^2} \\
\text{} \\
D = \frac{V_1^2}{A} - \frac{V_1^2}{2A} 
\\ \text{} \\
D = \frac{V_1^2}{2A}
$$

What is $v$ at $D$ for $V_2$? First, find the time $t$ at which the car will reach $D$ when starting from $V_2$.

$$
D =  V_2t - \frac{A}{2}t^2 = \frac{V_1^2}{2A}
\\ \text{} \\
\frac{A}{2}t^2 - V_2t + \frac{V_1^2}{2A} = 0
\\ \text{} \\
t = \frac{V_2 \pm \sqrt{V_2^2 - 4\frac{A}{2}\frac{V_1^2}{2A}}}{A}
\\ \text{} \\
t = \frac{V_2 \pm \sqrt{V_2^2 - V_1^2}}{A}
\\ \text{} \\
v=V_2 - A\frac{V_2 \pm \sqrt{V_2^2 - V_1^2}}{A}
\\ \text{} \\
v=\sqrt{V_2^2 - V_1^2}
\\ \text{} \\
v=\sqrt{70^2 - 60^2} = 36mph
$$
