% Lessons from C

## Arrays
Initialize an array with `int input[4] = {1023, 1, 2};`

## ASCII characters
### Converting between upper and lowercase
Uppercase ASCII alpha characters have codes between 65 (`'A'`) and 90 (`'Z'`). Lower case start at 97. You can therefore convert between the two by adding or subtracting 32.

### Digits
The ASCII digits run from 48 (0) through 57 (9). To transform a digit character to a number, subtract 48.

## Strings
### There is no string
C doesn't have strings, only arrays of characters. The type is a `const char*`: that is, a pointer to the memory address of the `char` that starts the string. Strings are terminated by the null character, `\0`.

### Iterating through a string
Strings (or `const char*`) are null terminated, and therefore you can iterate over the characters of them with a for loop like so:

```c
bool xo(const char* str) {
  int excess = 0;

  for (int c = 0; str[c]; c++) {
    if (lower(str[c]) == 'x')
      excess++;
    else if (lower(str[c]) == 'o')
      excess--;
  }

  return !excess;
}

// or

int len(const char* str) {
  int i = 0;
  while (str[i])
    i++;
  return i;
}
```

### Dynamic allocation of strings
It's often the case that you'll need to dynamically allocate memory for a string. For this, `calloc` is useful, because it initializes the memory to 0, aka the null character. You can then bang on the array element by element, and when you stop banging in it (provided you don't go off the end), it will be self terminating, since the next character will be the terminator.

```c
char* reverse(const char* str) {
  int l = len(str);
  char* ret = calloc(l + 1, sizeof(char));
  for (int i = 0; str[i]; i++)
    ret[i] = str[l - i - 1];
  return ret;
}
```

### Getting the string representation of a number

```c
  char digits[20];
  sprintf(digits, "%d", num);
```

## Numbers
### Working with digits
Sometimes you need to work with the individual digits of a number. This can be done with combinations of `/= 10` and `% 10`. Another useful trick is that the number of digits in a number can be obtained by `ds = log10(num)+1`.

```c
int* digits(int num) {
  int l = log10(num) + 1;
  int* d = malloc(l * sizeof(int));

  for (int i = l - 1; i >= 0; i--) {
    d[i] = num % 10;
    num /= 10;
  }

  return d;
}
```
